---
layout: post
title: Tuning a Postgres BRIN index
---


I'm working on a new PostgreSQL database at work, and it's just 
getting big enough where getting the indexes right is 
becoming more noticeable. 
I just scored a big "win" by adding a properly
thought-out BRIN index
to a particular table, but it took me a bit to get there.

## What I didn't know about BRIN could fill a blog post

The first half of this post are introductory
and cover the obvious and better-documented aspects
of the BRIN index.  The second half is the subtle 
aspects I needed to figure out in order to use the index
effectively for my use case.

## BRIN indexes -- the easy bits

Lots of blog posts/tutorials explain clearly what a BRIN index
is and how to create and use one. If you know the basics about a BRIN
index, you can 
skip to the next part of this post. If you aren't familiar with
this index type, and my brief explanations aren't 
enough detail, you can google it and find plenty of basic explainers.
Of course, the [Postgresql docs](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/brin-intro.html) are always a good source of information as well.

### What is a BRIN index?

A BRIN index is a Block Range INdex.
It is a lightweight way to index data in large tables that is "banded" in
physical storage.  For example, if your data is typically added chronologically
and has a date column, the data layout on the table will be banded by date. 
Given the date on one row, the date on the next row is almost certainly the 
same date or the next day's date.

It works by creating a data structure that stores, for each "block range,"
the minimum and maximum value of the indexed column for that block of rows.
When searching for the rows that match the indexed column, the query 
can go block-by-block as a first pass, rather than row-by-row.
Only the matching blocks need to be checked row-by-row.

### By default, BRIN indexes need to be maintained explicitly

The default behavior of a BRIN index is to NOT keep the index
up to date with the table. This makes table inserts go faster, but
means that the DBA must call the appropriate [index maintenance functions]
(https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-admin.html#FUNCTIONS-ADMIN-INDEX)
or the index must be created with `autosummarize = 1` .

Unindexed blocks have to be searched row-by-row.
If you create a BRIN index with the default settings and never 
summarize it, the index will have no effect on your queries.

## Brin indexes, the subtle bits

### How many rows are in a block?
*Or, why the default block size is almost certainly wrong for your particular table*

The benefits of searching block-by-block are modulated by the 
number of rows in a block: Are you going by 10's or 1000's or 100,000's?

You want the blocks to be big enough that searching
block-by-block creates a noticeable benefit, and small enough that when you
hit the case where you have to search a block row-by-row, you're not walking through
a million rows to only end up using three of them.

The index block size is specified in database pages.
You will need to know the patterns in your table and your typical queries in 
order to pick a good number of rows to put in your blocks, and **then** you 
need to do the
storage math to determine how many database pages that number of rows uses.

This is the query I came up with to determine a good value to use 
as my estimate for storing one row of my table:

{% highlight sql %}
/*
 * Estimate the amount of storage used by one row
 * of table 'my_table'
 */
SELECT
    24 + -- base overhead for any row
    SUM(
        CASE 

        WHEN attlen > 0 
        THEN attlen  -- storage size of column type when not NULL

        -- but attlen == -1 means the column can be TOASTed
        ELSE 18 -- overhead for a TOASTed column

        END
    )
FROM
         pg_tables pt
    JOIN pg_class pc
        ON pt.tablename = pc.relname
    JOIN pg_attribute pa
        ON pa.attrelid = pc.oid
WHERE
    pt.tablename = 'my_table'
;
{% endhighlight %}

Once you decide on your best estimate for the row size of your table,
and your best estimate for the number of rows to put in a block, you
need to figure out how many pages to put in a block and set the
`pages_per_range` storage parameter.  There are 8192 bytes in a page, 
so 8192 divided by row size gives you the rows per page.  The
desired rows per block divided by the rows per page gives you the 
desired number of pages per block.

The default number of pages for a BRIN index block is 128.  For a narrow
table, this may be too many. For a wide table, it may be too few.
If you don't do the math, you'll never know.

### Go ahead and throw in more columns!

On my umpteenth trip through the Postgres docs trying to get the best
speed-up with my new index, I came across this:

> A multicolumn BRIN index can be used with query conditions that involve any subset of the index's columns. Like GIN and unlike B-tree or GiST, index search effectiveness is the same regardless of which index column(s) the query conditions use. The only reason to have multiple BRIN indexes instead of one multicolumn BRIN index on a single table is to have a different pages_per_range storage parameter.  [source](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/latest/indexes-multicolumn.html)

That's very different from the other indexes I use frequently: B-tree indexes
can be multicolumn, but because the tree is built in a particular
column order, it's hard to make a B-tree that is effective
for more than one or two columns. Hash indexes are restricted to a single column.

With BRIN indexes, adding additional columns to the index costs very little! 
You don't have to worry about column order, and Postgres will construct the
multicolumn index efficiently so there is no reason to create two single-column
indexes.

Once you've identified a primary column that shows
banded behavior, and you've decided to put in a BRIN index, it's OK
to add additional correlated columns without worrying too much. They may be a little
more weakly correlated than the primary column that caused you to create
the BRIN index in the first place.

For example, if you have an orders table that is updated chronologically
as orders come in, you may have a correlation between when daylight hours are
and when orders come in from North America, Europe, and Asia.
This correlation may not be as perfectly banded as the `order_time` column, but 
the `region_id` of the order may have enough of a correlation
that it's worth throwing in as a second column to see if it adds value if 
you query that frequently.
It's a low-risk experiment to try!
